huge thanks to Aura for sponsoring this
video more on them later so here's the
question can your negativity your
insecurities your demons your tragedies
whatever they are can they be used to
improve your life you know I think the
insecurity drives me really really hard
I don't think that doubt is a bad thing
it sounds a little toxic but it made me
write harder I say it in Seneca there is
one blessing conferred by constant
Misfortune that it finally brings
strength to those it always plagues is
this the best you can do I say it in
Sylvia Plath perhaps someday I'll crawl
back home beaten defeated but not as
long as I can make stories out of my
heartbreak Beauty out of Sorrow husband
runs off with a politician
make good art I say Nelson Mandela it is
in the character of growth that we
should learn from both Pleasant and
unpleasant experiences I try to find
ways thrive on that I see it in writers
like Poe Bronson who says that the way
that he overcomes writer's block is to
write what makes him angry it became
personal with me I see it in this app I
use where I can't access social media
unless I go to the gym the combination
of guilt and fear of getting caught
there really has been effective so far
John Wick killed that from me The
Waterboy water sucks bro use it on the
field help I'm seeing it in the book
that I am reading right now Jeanette
McCurdy's I'm glad my mum died all of
these examples have one thing in common
instead of saying negativity as
something to be shunned they've embraced
it used it and made their lives better
all right so this video started with a
question can you use your insecurities
your demons your past tragedies to fuel
you forward can they be used for good
now this might seem like a simple
concept but the first time that I talked
about it on the channel it had a very
refreshing response it shows that you
are someone who actually does struggle
with productivity to the point where you
are willing to use any tool at your
disposal that produces results it's a
nice break from the productivity gurus
who just automatically wake up ready and
willing never allowing their body to
Tire or feel lackadaisical stay genuine
firstly thank you that is absolutely
lovely but secondly the insight there is
so fascinating we are not all born with
the same head however we are born into
the same world and there is a very
strong and potentially quite damaging
cultural message that unless you're
doing something for the most altruistic
positive reason don't do it at all buddy
world peace I think this idea it makes
people feel ashamed of their own
complexity so in order to sort of I
don't know tackle that stigma is that
the right term I have decided to put all
of the research and stories and tips
that I've found on this idea into this
video
[Music]
our first story comes from the world of
ultra running and that's because I find
that Ultra Runners often give really
good advice to people with complicated
heads I mean think about how often I'd
find themselves in like kilometer 63 of
an 100 kilometer race and they know how
much they have to go in but they also
know how tired they are they're not
going to be thinking of roses and change
in the world no they're going to be
using whatever they can to put one foot
in front of the other and often as
somebody who I would consider a bit
tapped I find that strategy is laid out
by Ultra Runners apply really well to my
life take to reappear an Australian
Ultra Runner sure Taria might start a
race to inspire people or raise funds or
something positive but when things get
tough and things always get tough she
doesn't use these goals to motivate her
instead she turns to negativity and she
literally uses her head to scare herself
into running I would imagine that I was
a messenger for a queen and I had to get
a message to her otherwise a wall would
break out and I'd have the deaths of
thousands of people in my hands I love
it and looking back on our life you can
see that these tactics have actually
popped up even before she she became an
athlete like when she was in high school
one day I decided I wanted to do well in
HSA and so when I told Mr Smith my
subject choices he went
you're not smart enough
I was infuriated but I used his
negativity as motivation
in fact he was a catalyst for four
degree into a new Direction I ended up
coming first in all my subjects I got a
mark in the high 90s and I won the math
medal so go suck at Mr Smith
suck it Mr Smith I feel that it sounds
simple but it's kind of cool right like
Korea took something negative and turned
it into purpose and before we finish
Teresa's story let's first explore that
concept
nature the Silly Billy he said he who
has a y to live for can bear with almost
any hell this quote rang true with a
holocaust Survivor Victor Frankel and
many years after that the philosophy
ended up on LinkedIn
find your Y is a 2017 book by Simon
sinek but today I'm gonna be the Simon
cynic I'm gonna critique it not really
honestly I'm just gonna add like my two
cents alright so the core concept of the
book Finding Your why this is using the
idea of purpose or your mission in order
to propel you through life the idea is
that if you know why you want to do
something or why you exist then the how
and the what and The Who and the where
will all fall into place if you know you
want to end world hunger you'll figure
it out theoretically or like they said
in Chicken Run where there's a will
there's a way couldn't agree more and I
will be leaving that way but what
happens when that will feels
inaccessible well instead of just
finding out why we find our dark why
a dark why just like a y is a motivating
reason for doing something unlike the
wire from before which was nice and
lofty this one's made up of a bunch of
things that you don't really want to
broadcast about yourself anger jealousy
insecurity Revenge a sense of guilt
shame disgust all of these bad qualities
that we'd rather rid but before we do
why don't we just like use them you know
what I'm saying or in simpler words your
dark why is your way of using
insecurities to improve your life what
you are looking for is energy emotional
energy doesn't matter if it's good or
bad you just want some sort of power
source that you can use whereas I've
been thinking about it you're just
looking to start the car
foreign
so the more that I look into this the
more that I think the dark wise success
at least with me boils down to two
reasons the first is something called
the action motivation loop it's the idea
that action and motivation are related
and that they feed into each other now
you'll notice that it is a loop and this
is where we get to dispelling a cultural
myth the idea that you need to be
motivated in order to act you need to be
full of inspiration you need to have
just watched Remember the Titans and
then only then can you go out there and
make that origami hat buddy yeah but as
many people have pointed out the way to
actually start the loop is with action
action leads to motivation and once you
act then you can get the benefit of the
cycle now this first action can be
positively motivated but it can also be
negatively motivated I like to think of
motivation as a full tank of Petrol in a
car to access that tank you've got to
start the car which traditionally means
using the keys this is your positive why
but if you can't find your keys if you
can't find that positivity there is
another option you could Hotwire it baby
you can bypass that ignition switch and
get that motor started with a dark wire
hot wiring might not be encouraged but
it does get the job done so on both
cases you end up getting access to that
full full tank of petroly motivation
like don't get me wrong once you're in
that Loop do it for the right reasons
but there is some research to suggest
that starting that initial action is a
bit easier with negativity and this is
where the second reason that our dark y
Works comes in negativity bias the
negativity bias is this idea that
negative things have a greater effect on
your psychological State and processes
than neutral or positive things in
simpler words bad stuff sticks in your
head there was this really harrowing
study that was done by this online
newspaper called the city reporter they
had noticed that there was all of this
negative news and there were so many
people who were complaining about the
negative news and they were saying oh we
want to see the positive news and the
city reporters like we hear ya we get
you and that is why at the City Reporter
December 1st is officially good news day
where we only publish good news instead
of all that outraged clickbait that
we're all pretty sick of the city
reporter was going to post nice things
like hey absolutely no traffic jams on
most of the highways nice but here's the
thing man while their aims were pure
while they were trying to prove that
people genuinely want it nice and used
they actually proved the opposite on
that day December 1st on good news day
the City Reporter lost two-thirds of its
readership yup brutal right what they
learned is that negative news gets
clicks negativity launches people into
action my question is does that action
have to be Doom scrolling what if that
action could be something positive the
story of a guy who answered that
question in the most extreme way
possible after a quick word from today's
sponsor who honestly might help you
answer a similar question aura yes this
is the ad but it's also kind of relevant
so if you're looking to improve your
life and your mental well-being this is
for you so full transparency before
shooting this video I was kind of like
freaking out and I actually had to go
sit in my car with the aircon on full
blast and meditate for like 20 minutes
how did I do that with an app called
aura yes I wonder if they really want me
to say that but that is honestly how I
use it Aura is an apple award-winning
mindfulness and sleep app helping over 7
million people it's an all-in-one mental
health coach and it really does have it
all it's got magic stories soundscapes
breath work life coaching we've all got
different choices when it comes to brain
massaging but Aura is on it thanks Aura
now if you're sitting there thinking hey
Cam that aura sure does sound swell and
I too would like to be a relaxed
well-slept zen master do you have some
sort of code yeah I do you can get
started right now completely free on
aura's website using my special link
this one which is also in the
description the first 500 people get
that free trial plus an exclusive 25 off
so if you want that VIP treatment get in
quick baby links down there start
relaxing your big impressive juicy wet
brains with aura alrighty where were we
negativity tends to get a reaction from
us but is it possible that we could
choose that reaction
take the case of this guy his name is
Rich Roll it's the night before his 40th
birthday he had this routine where
because he worked himself to the Bone
he'd reward himself by chilling out in
front of the TV and eating fast food
like heaps of fast food like enough to I
don't know feed a tiny Hamlet there he
is his ritual ends it's night time and
he goes to put himself to bed his bed is
up a small flight of stairs and as he
gets halfway up these stairs he realizes
that he is out of breath and he's like
oh my goodness I sure am unfit this is
this is not great he catches his breath
goes into his bedroom and there in his
bed he sees his young daughter and he
has this thought a thought that he's
never had before where he's like if I'm
this unfit am I going to be around for
her wedding and this starts to scare him
like a lot ordinarily when an insecurity
like this would pop up he'd just drown
it out to TV and food but today he felt
different maybe because he was about to
turn 40 or maybe he was just really out
of breath but for whatever reason he
decides instead of avoiding the truth he
is gonna stare at it so he goes to the
mirror still huffing from these stairs
and staring back at him he sees it a
miserable unfit middle-aged man and he's
like dude
is this really the best you can do that
question is so sobering and it came from
a place of Shame guilt self-disgust
these insecurities would ultimately
launch him into his next phase of life
he never wanted to be that guy again he
changed his diet completely he started
noticing that those stairs they didn't
wear him down anymore and from this he's
like I think I got some energy so with
that energy he starts to run and run and
run ultimately Rich Roll would go on to
be one of the world's most iconic Ultra
endurance triathletes he would go on to
finish ultraman's Five Iron Mans in a
week and create a brilliant podcast
documenting the whole thing within a few
short years this self-disgust took him
from a guy who could barely make it up
the stairs to one of the world's fittest
people
holy [__] that's a that's one hell of a
plot twist for all Richie say how did he
do it and more importantly how do we do
it that's the question right because if
we can answer that we can take those
tools and use them in our own life
here's my interpretation of what's going
on in Rich's head rich is having a
conflict between what he wants in the
short term and what he wants in the long
term in the short term he wanted burgers
and TV in the long term he wanted to be
fit and healthy uh oh he can't have both
the burger path does not lead to the
long-term path he wants now rationally
you might look at these two options and
say man Rich if you want the long one
pick the long one but unfortunately
comparing a long-term reward that you
have to wait for and a short-term reward
that you could have right now it's not a
fair fight in fact it's a very unfair
fight it'd be like if I was to fight
Manny Pacquiao
let's smash him so what Rich has to do
is level the playing field he needed to
express his long-term goal in terms of a
short-term feeling and then he can pitch
his short-term feelings of the two paths
against each other so now the choice
looks like this you got burger and TV
which feels good and then you've got
running which for Rich comes with pain
Rich uses his dark why he consciously
adds shame self-disgust in the image of
his early death to the Burger side until
it's way less painful to just go for
that run and I'm not saying that other
people should do this this is obviously
just what Rich did but outside of the
world of food and running I do think
it's a really fascinating blueprint for
changing your life and as for naming
that blueprint I think I'm gonna go with
Tyler the hypothetical scenario Creator
oh outside of his music Tyler the
Creator is 100 sober and when he talks
about it he often mentions
self-awareness and hypotheticals I have
a addictive personality like where I
wear the same outfit for a month and a
half type [__] so me being aware of that
if I ended up liking alcohol or some
[__] it would be the [__] downfall of
me he knows himself well enough to
predict his mistakes without actually
having to make them take this quote for
example I know I don't want to be that
drunk guy but I do know that I want to
hit a jump on a dirt bike I can look at
that and say I want to do that but I've
never seen a drunk guy and be like damn
I want to be that so if you're in the
mood for action or a practical takeaway
this is a simple decision making
framework that works for me we'll kick
off our hypotheticals by defining two
long-term potential timelines the worst
you that you could become and the best
you that you could become for example
cruel lonely alcoholic slob and fun
loving athletic Mad Dog yeah that's mine
now identify an action in your life that
you no longer want and one that you
would like to replace it with vaping
replaced with scuba diving now identify
the short-term gain and pain that keep
you from changing then like retro we tip
the short term scales he added
self-disgust for Tyler embarrassment
whatever makes that unwanted action
actually unwanted then bolster up those
short-term positives and you've got
yourself a nice little uh decision
making framework feel free to change it
to make it work for you use multiple
sources Beyond me because I'm just
summed up with the YouTube channel and
don't stress if your reasons are weird I
mean hell to read a pit when she needed
to run she would use fiction she made
her legs move by using the threat of
imaginary people dying and on that note
of Tori appeared I do want to tell One
More Story and heads up this is a pretty
heavy story so if you're not good with
stories around fire then skip to this
time code here
the year is 2011 and Tria Pitt she's
running this 100 kilometer race through
the harsh Australian Outback the sun was
beating down on her but she kept putting
one foot in front of the other one
kilometer down 20 kilometers down 50
double Marathon she's using whatever
motivation she can tap into to stay in
motion she keeps on running eventually
she passes the 90 kilometer Mark and
she's only got 10 kilometers to go she
could pitch in the shower the warm bed
the glory of finishing and that's when
she heard a rumble a fire had broken out
and it was quickly engulfing the area
that teria was running through on a dry
day under the hot Australian Sun she
watched that fire get bigger until she
knew she couldn't escape
Tria was engulfed by the Flames she was
later found and helicoptered out and
recovered in hospital but the burns had
caused her severe permanent damage she
spent a long painful time in recovery
but she also found strength in an old
tactic that she used this idea of
visualization she'd use hypotheticals in
order to fuel her while I was in
hospital covered Head To Toe with
managers I would
whilst on patrol in Afghanistan by
perceiving myself as that bloke cause
hardest Nails I
immediately started to toughen up and
within a year terea was running once
again
[Music]
[Applause]
it's a lot to take in when you hear a
story like that and you listen to
somebody make meaning out of a literal
nightmare but it's also super empowering
and it reminds me of that reframing
question this is one of my favorite
questions it's how are the worst things
that have ever happened to you the best
things that have ever happened to you
this is one of those questions that
forces you to flip your thinking and
it's not that you're trying to be
grateful for tragedy it's more that
you're trying to realize that you're
thinking can flip so if you're looking
for a practical takeaway I would really
recommend journaling on this question or
even just having it as a discussion with
a friend because while a lot of the
stuff that we've talked to up until now
is about that first little initial push
to get the dark way to motivate you this
question it helps us say that in the
long term negativity is often the
greatest tool for growth so where does
this leave us it's dark why I guess at
this point in the video if you think it
works if you like the stories the
research the tips then what I found
helps is actually articulating a dark
why and in other videos where I've
briefly mentioned a dark wire I've seen
people articulate theirs this guy says
that if he has no motivation to exercise
he'll literally imagine that his wife
has cheated on him and now he wants to
get revenge ripped it doesn't have to be
elegant it doesn't have to be nice it
doesn't have to be the reason that you
broadcast to everybody it just has to
work and I think that's why I wanted to
make this video it's one more comment it
was a person who said that they didn't
know that the dark wire was even allowed
but they felt like they were too ashamed
to use it let alone admit it to people
and I think that's kind of
sad
remember the car analogy with the keys
and the hot wiring personally I firmly
believe that everybody has that full
tank of Petrol in them they've got that
motivation that untapped potential but
accessing this tank is a different story
and that's just because people are born
into different situations with different
heads some people are born with car keys
in their hand other people will spend
years trying to find it some people
might not even find them at all however
everybody has access to hot wiring
less metaphorically we all have demons
we all have tragedy we all have
insecurities but we're told that using
these is taboo this benefits people who
might not have as much and good for them
sure but it keeps the people who've got
slightly more complex heads kind of
stuck it says oh don't Hotwire that car
I just find your keys what if that's not
an option and so instead we get told
that there is only one way to start you
must be some morally perfect altruistic
superhuman driven by inoffensive love
very marketable as well and so we see
people hide or deny their feelings
things like jealousy apathy guilt anger
sadness a lack of self-respect but
within each of these feelings there's
also a hidden upside jealousy could be a
sense of direction apathy could come
with fearlessness guilt can be a
byproduct of empathy anger drive and
sadness honesty and a lack of
self-respect is just the Dark Side of
knowing what you no longer want to be in
this world so you know you can't find
your keys right now that's cool man
personally I'm all for using whatever
you have available just to get things
going because the thing that actually
matters is all the stuff afterwards and
the thing that sucks is seeing people
never even start
thank you so much for watching I do hope
you enjoyed that I hope you got to list
out your dark wires in our method
section um let me know if you have other
tactics that are similar to this in the
comments I think a lot of people would
be very curious if you do subscribe if
you're new if you like what you saw if
you like the vibe and you want a little
more your boy then uh check out my book
your head is a houseboat members if you
want some q a stuff check out my shop
got lots of clothes and thanks again to
Aura links in the description all right
have a glorious day catch ya
[Music]